rufio with the rain let's go
yeah yeah
yeah
hey
good morning good afternoon good evening
no matter where you're coming from hope
you all are doing well
welcome back
rufio hello trippy with the raid ah
string team coming in through
i love to see it as always folks if you
have some time before before class what
are you doing should be hanging out with
rufio then you come through with the
raid you're stacking points on top of
points channel points on channel points
[Laughter]
good to see you all
full stack your first live class hey
welcome
jason carr hey thank you for the forget
that subs hope you're doing well
[Laughter]
curious as i was but i was watching the
bachelor uh
sometimes you got to put the bachelor
down to to check out the stream team
streams you know what i'm saying i
thought you got to put the bachelor away
to come live the class i know how it
could be
i get that way too
welcome everybody hope everyone is doing
well hope you are having a good
thursday uh tonight
as promised we are running back the crud
the create the reading the believing
but tonight we're putting the you in
crud as well so we're gonna do what we
did last class where we
see the example live we talk through it
we see it multiple times from different
angles we draw it out we see it live we
look at the code right
and then once we've done all that we're
going to look at all the little
accessory things that are making this
run connecting our database
making sure that we can use environment
variables and other fun stuff like that
so a lot of stuff to get to tonight
we're going to do less review than we
normally do we're going to jump right
into the crud but before we do that and
before we jump right into the crud
let's go ahead and see if folks have any
questions
always let's start off with a few
questions just so that folks that are
running from work or are doing the
things they have to do can come and get
in here so let's go ahead
do we code along i don't really think
this is like a code along type class
this is more of a watch and ask
questions type of class
question of the day the question of the
day is what is your favorite crud
operation so are you more of a creator a
reader updater or a deleter what are you
at in chat when you put in what is your
favorite crud operation so far
it was like delete the power
reading creating
all right i see you i see y'all
i think a lot of people are doing
creating a lot of folks saying deleting
a few updates here and there maybe maybe
maybe it's because we haven't gotten to
update yet so people don't have the love
for update like they have the love for
creating reading and deleting uh so
maybe maybe that's what it is
i think i my favorite is the reading and
i'll tell you why
the reason why the reading is my
favorite is because the moment
that i understood
that when i hit enter it was making a
request to a server
and the server heard that request went
and talked to a database got some data
plugged it into an ejs template and then
it it spit out some html and it
responded with that all the way back to
the
phone that was in my hand
and it took under a few seconds and
it just
worked
like what that's the internet
that blew my mind so i'm a reader
civic i already shared the source code
it's in the materials for today and it's
the same materials that we used uh last
class as well
melee ruru mellie ruru hey thank you for
the gift itselves i appreciate that
fly ashley with the create a welcome
all right
you ever get into the office
uh the office was my um
uh are folks having trouble with the
slides cassasaurus says that they're
getting a 404.
our folks are in trouble with the slides
let's make sure that it's the right link
in there
the live slides
yup 404
all right let's see
um this was the link for it so this
should be the live slides let me put
this in chat for y'all
and then i'll update the um
we know what a 404 is yeah we do
let me let me try opening this in
the cognito window
huh
i'm getting a 404 too
oh you have to put slash live on it
oh maybe we forgot the slash live that's
what it is
yeah yeah we forgot to slash live i'm
sorry
there we go
let me uh let me update the uh nightbot
too so we have the updated one there
yeah i just forgot the slash live
boom
cool
all right there we go we should be all
set you should be able to use it now you
could do the expression point slides get
the slides if you need them and it
should just be the the slash live that
was the problem there
cool
alrighty
i have a call with a local recruiter
next week that got in touch with me
after we met at a local meetup event i
don't feel ready any advice know what
you're walking into say hey i'm really
excited for our call next week is there
anything that i need to prepare is there
anything that you that i should know is
it more just of an informational getting
to know each other type of call right
don't go ever go into your calls with
recruiters or any type of interview like
an accident always know
right
always know
what you're getting into
cool
pipeline that's actually what we use
yeah that's what we use
oh somebody said we were talking about
the office sorry
uh so i've watched the office at least
seven times like all the way through
and for the longest time it was the
television show that i fell asleep to
and so i grew up with like something
always in the background playing like
like something on the television or
something playing in the background
and so
it's very hard for me to fall asleep
without like noise playing and so
sometimes i use like you know like a
white noise thing or like i but for me i
just normally let shows run and people
talking helps me fall asleep better and
so i like the office because it's all
people talking right
and then i was on reddit and i
found out
i found out that um
that there was a subreddit
right
it was a subreddit for folks that fall
asleep to futurama
like it's a whole subreddit just
dedicated to people that people that
fall asleep to to listening to futurama
and then in that channel i was like wait
a minute that's what i do
but with the office and then there's a
whole subreddit for folks that fall
asleep uh to the office which i thought
was pretty funny too
so apparently it's a thing people do
and so i've i've seen i've seen the
office at least
seven runs through and probably way more
because i fall asleep to it you know
all right i think we got the uh
i think we uh we got to it
then we got some questions here
trashy glad you're back live with us a
alrighty
thank you
the questions we got a lot of stuff to
get into tonight so let's jump into it
please if you haven't already check in
right check in you can do exclamation
point check in here that will give you
the link to our tweet go ahead and like
and retweet that for me please um
i had some folks that are
that are starting to get um
that are starting to get like like
getting towards the end of their
interview phase and they're asking for
references
and so they'll reach out to me and i'll
say all right well let me let me see all
the projects that you built let me see
the things that you've done let me see
if you were here for class right so
this is important this is important to
me it's one of the things i look at
before i before i put my before i put my
my my my word on the line there to say
this person knows the tech they're
talking about i need to see that you
were here i need to see that you're
doing the stuff that you said you were
doing and so checking in is really
important it's one of the first things
we look at when we go out and
make sure that we can do that post
program support that we're trying to
build for y'all so
please if you haven't already checked in
go ahead and like and retweet it also
just helps more folks find us
all right
leon how can i make you laugh i don't
know it's pretty it's pretty random
pretty random
all right
is missing last class a problem for
today and maybe not so much we're going
to do a lot of review we might go a
little fast through the creating the
reading and the deleting um but
you'll be able to hang on i think
yeah
cool
if you haven't submitted your work
right if you haven't submitted your work
uh please go ahead and submit your api
homework right please go ahead and
submit your api homework
right
if you haven't already go ahead and fill
that out for me please it's been really
cool seeing all the stuff that you built
last class you were able to build apis
but identically able to build full crud
apps let's go
you got to really think about i put it
in the the email today i was like think
of think think back to when you were
learning html and that was the world
then think about when you're learning
css and that that was the focus right
and now you're all out here trying to
build full stack web applications you
already built your own apis like what
that's that's wild um
and so i said it before i'll say it
again each and every single one of you
that are here right now should be proud
of yourself should be proud of the work
that you're doing they show up time and
time again to keep throwing yourself
against that brick wall which is
learning how to code
the stuff you're being able to being
able to do right now is just
mind-blowing how many folks set out on
this journey to be able to do the things
that you know how to do and yes the back
end is wild yes we're connecting a lot
of different pieces but the more you
throw yourself into it the more it's
going to be able to click and the more
it's going to happen and so i'm glad
that you're here i'm proud that you're
here let's keep it pushing
pseudo co-op with 19 months what
yo pseudocove thank you for the for the
for the sub i appreciate that
all right
let's keep pushing here
uh so
we had a little a little a little
a little run in with the the code wars
crew uh so let's talk about it real
quick
um
the
the marketing manager and i think it was
the ceo um from codewars reached out and
they kindly requested that we set our
repos to private
so if you are pushing codewords to
github they kindly ask that you turn
those repos to private
and um
there is a setting on github where if
you make your repos private you still
get those delicious delicious green
squares
and
apparently it's one of their you know
one of their lovely lovely rules baked
into their into their code of conduct
and so they asked nicely uh to me by
email to if i could relay the note uh
that you should set your repos to
private uh now
the code is yours
it's licensed to yours what you decide
to do with that code is up to you but i
think we can we can be good neighbors
right we can be good neighbors
and um and if you feel like it go ahead
and set that to private to be a good
neighbor
now
i don't think
the folks that some folks have run into
in their discord as representative of
code wars as a whole so let's try not to
base our judgment on the actions of a
few
just like we wouldn't want folks to
judge a hundred devs on the actions of a
few right so
they've asked nicely up to you whether
or not you want to you want to to do
such but they have asked that you set
your repos to private
but why so they don't want folks
to be able to like google
the answers
right
elena lux hey with the raid what's going
on
what's going on thank you for the raid
thank you for bringing everybody by
hey how you doing
what are you all working on today
what were you all up to today
we with the the last raid we got to see
the the projects coming along the game
is coming along so like the outside area
being able to like run around like that
it's wild to me
to see that whole thing come to life
i hope like when you're done the game
you do like a documentary of like all
your past footage just like combined
together and then like you like release
i don't know i think it'd be pretty cool
getting through the cut scenes today
that's dope that's pretty cool
if you're not following them and they're
they're good friends of of 100 devs if
you're not following you definitely need
to follow them let me let me paste their
channel here in chat
i've said it before but i'll say it
again if
you i'm if i'm on if i'm like working
i'm probably lurking in their chat
we were just talking about how i like to
have things playing in the background
and their channel is definitely one of
them but it's also just wild to see like
not only is it like in the background so
like you feel like you're not by
yourself
but to see like the progress it's just
i don't know it's inspiring it makes you
want to write better code so if you want
to write better code you should
definitely be hanging out in their chat
just to see someone that's
throwing their their passion into a
project that that kind of gets you going
to do the same thing with yours
there we go
yeah
so
we um
we we just were talking about how code
wars asked us
to mark our repos as private the thing
that they're afraid of is folks like are
trying to solve the code wars challenges
they google the result they see it they
plug it in now i think that ship is way
past saled uh there are full repos of
every code wars that's ever been posted
with the solution
um but it's one of the things they ask
so we can be nice we can be kind
and it doesn't cost us too much to do so
but i do think the code is yours it is
licensed your way right
it is licensed to use so you do whatever
the heck you want don't let some guy on
the internet tell you how to how to live
your life
do we still get green activity if we
make our repos private you have to turn
the setting
right you got to turn the setting on
on that repo to get credit when you push
to it
yep so just make sure you have that
setting on so that as you push you still
get credit for the private repo
cool
account contribution settings there you
go thank you chibi
cool
yeah it's account and then contribution
settings yep
can anyone tell me why today source code
has a huge font uh because
and then we're going to keep going into
it i have a like this little
settings.json
that sets the font and the terminal to a
specific size so if you clone down my
code it's going to set your edit your
your to that size
i didn't do this on purpose i i just
forgot
because i had to make mine bigger for
stream right and so i guess when i
pushed this i should have i should have
added this to my
what what should i what should i have
added this to
i should have added to my git ignore so
yeah when we go over the get ignored
that'll be the thing that we add to the
git ignore so that folks that clone it
down um don't have to worry about that
cool
all right
homework
i asked you to watch these videos i
asked you to read the article by zell
once again a huge set out to shout out
to zell
i really do think they make some of the
best tutorials online they really do
break down
some really meaty topics step by step
with like pictures of everything so a
lot of stuff that we're using tonight
they have walked through in detail so if
you need that detail especially after
you've sat through class and going back
to this reading will be a little bit
easier and so i i think that it's really
worthwhile to go through it i've
assigned it multiple times i really do
think it's that important even though
it's meaty i think it's really important
to go through and shout out to zelx for
making uh great content and then making
it free
cool
summer break folks
summer break let's go turn up so we will
be taking a two week break
if you missed last class with when we
announced it we're taking a two week
break so tonight is our last class for
two weeks
uh including
office hours so no office hours uh no
no class
but we will have some project nights in
between so if you want to come and work
together we'll have some we'll have some
time for you to do that if you want to
work on a cred app together we'll have
some time for that
we'll have the stream team going strong
so we'll make sure that we can highlight
members of the stream team um during
this break so that you you're not by
your lonesome that you have folks to
code along with uh whether it's elena
lux or somebody on the stream team
know that there are people that you can
just hang out with while you're getting
your code on if you choose to to do that
so
for the break you can
dealer's choice here right or
player's choice i guess right
and so the idea here is that you can
take a break if you need to take a full
break that's okay use this time to rest
to recharge to get ready for the next
phase of program which is building real
full stack applications and getting
ready for our interviews via the hunt
the next phase of program is difficult
it is intense it is probably the hardest
part of program not in terms of learning
to code but the sheer things we have to
do to make sure we secure that job so if
you need to take the break you need that
time to relax and recharge boom go ahead
and do it
nate said we were on a break i should
have used that as the gift i did that
for the last one
um if you need the time to catch up we
have so many members of the ketchup crew
that are that are scrambling to to get
caught up and join us live i'm hoping
that this two-week break gives you that
chance if you want to join us live for
the end of program you can use that time
to catch up right
if you haven't done your professional
stuff maybe some time to get that
professional stuff done the completing
the checklist
getting some hours into your 100 hours
project i think that's what some of our
project nights will be around will be
around getting some of that 100 hours
project done and then the last thing too
is it might be time to start thinking
about your hit list so these are all
things you could be doing over these
next two weeks it's up to you how much
or how little you want to do just come
back ready to put in that work to hit
the home stretch to get our last few
classes in to hit the hunt ready and be
ready for
mega summer mega summer's making a back
folks if you don't know what mega summer
is oh boy
when we come back
is uh you're in for you're in for a
treat the hunt begins exactly blah the
hunt begins mega summer begins that's
all i'm going to say if you know you
know but when we come back it's
oh boy
that's all i'm going to say for now
let it linger you can go dig if you want
to dig but you were coming back to some
bangers folks so
take the time that you need if you need
it
and when we come back
i've saved the best for last
i have saved the best for last i said
for these past few classes these past
few classes really have been my favorite
like this
building of your api to transitioning to
building crowd apps this is my favorite
part of program
but the best part of program is the end
because it's when you start to reflect
on all the skills that you have right
you start to reflect on all the things
you're able to do and build and then
other folks start to see it as you start
the hunt and so i'm really excited for
you to get into that phase of program
all right
let's get into the back end folks we're
not wasting any time we're getting right
into it last class we talked about the
the creating the reading and the
deleting tonight we're reviewing that
we're going back to if it didn't make
sense it's great we're jumping back into
it continue to ask your questions
remember discord we have a node help
channel please use these help channels
and please over the break we're gonna
have a lot of folks that are kind of
plugging away trying to catch up if you
have the time go into this help channels
be kind be helpful answer their
questions okay
i really would appreciate that from all
of you there's a lot of folks here if if
folks showed up in those discord
channels to help others folks that are
on the catch-up crew folks that are that
are feeling a little behind can get the
support they need and so i'm going to
ask that of you over the next two weeks
if you have the time
alrighty
let's get into it
we also need folks to show up and ask
questions exactly if you have questions
make sure you ask those questions
cool
all right we're using node
right
we're using node right
[Laughter]
so he said leon i watch this with
parents please
oh the backyard i was like what
yeah uh oh
you got got then i guess
all right so we're using node and when
we first started using node
right we first started using node we
were using the raw modules we were
getting in there with the http
the fs we were getting there every every
every single
every single request we had to custom
build a route we had to tell it what
type of content to expect we had to tell
it how to send it when to send it we had
to do all this stuff
to do all this heavy lifting
and the problem
was that it wasn't it wasn't clean we
had to always think through exactly what
the users were going to do it just was a
lot to do and so we said how could we
clean this up how can we clean up our
back end code that was using node that
was using the core modules what's
something that can make our lives easier
of course
it was express
express
came in to save the day to make building
our
easier anything that deals with that
listening for the request and generating
the response the express helps us do
right so
before we jump into express and how it's
changed our lives we wanted to start off
by talking about how does the internet
work
and i've given myself a
lot don't do that to me
don't do that
[Laughter]
so we i don't know i don't know only ogs
remember that but um
one of the weirdest things is like so
you're streaming right like you're
streaming people will pop in and they'll
like see something you're doing and
they'll be like well what about this
thing like why aren't you teaching them
this like forget that we've been how
many 40 plus live classes
dozens of office hours somebody will
jump in and be like but what about
express why aren't you teaching them
express right and so
last cohort we were showing like the raw
modules and somebody came in and said
what about express and so uh that's that
it's kind of a little bit of a meme if
you know you know um
but it's kind of funny because
the reason why we don't start with
express it's so that you see the pain
but also like you know
the the benefits that you're getting
right if you jump right into express
it's a little harder to see like what's
happening underneath the hood you don't
understand like why we're using a
framework and so that gentle
progression i think does help things
solidify a little bit more in your brain
yeah
but yeah we will always have some code
we need to stop in to to ask us about
what we're doing that day which i think
is funny all right so talk about the
internet works
on one side of the lovely wire that
we've always talked about is we have our
client-side devices
and our client-side devices are just
computers
and often we have running on these
a program called a browser
right
and that browser enables us to
do things that make requests
to
other computers out there on the
internet
and these other computers that are out
there on the internet
we call
servers
now why did we call these other computer
servers from the very beginning
why are they servers
they serve exactly
i'm not talking like early 2000 break
dancing you got sir i'm talking about
files
right i'm talking about things that
we're going to send
back to the browser right and so
we have these client-side devices
and we go ahead and we type in things
into the browser
like we type in a url
and when we hit enter
that makes a request to a server what
are some other things that we can do on
the client side that would make a
request to a server we talked about like
typing in a url and hitting enter what's
something else that we could do right
what's something what's something else
that we could do
yeah we could refresh the page
if we refresh the page that's also going
to make a request to a server
right
what's something else we could do that
could make a request to a server
yeah filling out a form submitting a
form can make a request to a server um
clicking an anchor tag thank you hazel
that's a good one clicking an anchor tag
can make a request or server because
it's trying to take us to a new page
right
so we said enter a url we said refresh
the page we said click a link we said
submit a form
and then the last one that we saw um
just briefly with the deleting was this
idea of making a fetch to a server just
like we used to do client-side well our
apps can also make
requests to the server via fetches right
and the cool thing about fetches is we
get to say what kind of request it's
going to be a fetch could be
a delete could also be a update or a put
we get to decide with our fetches
cool so we have all these different ways
of making requests that come from the
client side and make their way to a
server
now these different kinds of requests
all have names right we know that they
are gets
they are
posts
they are puts
they are deletes
right where do these names come from
what why is it called a get request a
post request a put request a delete
request
yeah
these are the methods that
http understands remember the the thing
that is handling
the requests
and the response back
is http it's the protocol that we use
for the internet to work right and a
part of this protocol are these
different methods to get the post to put
the deletes right they're all part of
http
and we know that since we're using
express express is the thing that's
helping us utilize all these methods to
listen for them to respond to them we
could
code it with the raw http module but
express is going to make it easier for
us to do what
us to build out our what there's a
specific name for it
our apis exactly so
running on our server is some code
and that code
uh typically has a portion that's
listening for these requests
and we call that portion of the code
our api
and that api will be set up to hear the
gets the posts the puts the deletes
right and when it hears those requests
we are in control as to what
happens just like with a click event
when our users heard a click event we
got to write the code as to what
happened sometimes we were flipping a
coin sometimes we were doing rock paper
scissors sometimes we were doing some
math right when we heard that click
event we got to write what happened when
we heard that event it's the same thing
with our apis our apis are set up to
hear specific requests
on specific routes and when it hears
that request we get to code what happens
right we get to code what happens
now
these methods that are tied to http the
protocol for how we send and receive
stuff across the internet they're
they're they're not cool enough right we
want some words that we can use to talk
about these different operations and
what is really happening in our
applications so instead of get post put
delete we've come up with a better
acronym that that describes what each of
these methods are actually doing
please play the music
yeah we added crud create reading
updating and
deleting it's not get
it's read
not post
it's create
it's not update
oh it's not put
it's update
and it's not delete
it's delay
anybody love how the music just
definitely like
like petered out for me right at the
right time i'll take that
so
when we are talking about these methods
we've given them names that are just a
little bit cooler that help us to
describe what's happening in our
applications we're creating
right we're reading we're updating and
we're deleting and that just makes a
little bit easier to think through
what's happening in our application and
so we make these requests there's some
code that is running on our server that
hears these requests and then we can do
whatever the heck we want sometimes we
go to a database and get data sometimes
we spit out some html and respond with
it sometimes we just say everything went
okay it's up to us to decide what
happens when we hear these requests
and so that's what we had ventured out
on we ventured out on building an
application that could listen for all
these requests
generate responses and respond
cool
so
we know that our creating is when we're
trying to make something our reading is
when we're trying to get something from
the server or updating when we're trying
to change something and deleting is when
we're trying to remove something and we
see all four of these operations coming
to play
uh inside of our application that we
started last class so here is our
current wrappers application
and when i refresh
i can see uh the list of my
wrappers that i've added i've added
their stage name and their birth name we
also have a number of likes and we also
have the ability to delete
and so we have all these different
wrappers that we're adding i'm able to
create read update and delete so
my question here
what is the creating in this app what
are we doing to create that the first
bit of crud creating what are we doing
here in this app that enables us to
create
hey master
firewall welcome
yeah that form submitting that form is
what enables us to create
thanks drift
yeah when we submit this form we are
making a create request to our server
beautiful
uh what can do a read request what's a
read request in this application
yep we can type in the url like we could
type in localhost 2021
2121. uh we can also
uh refresh the page so refreshing or
typing in the url
is our um
i see his arena
that that
enables us to
make that read request beautiful
what are we doing here that's an update
request or a put
the likes exactly when we click this
thumbs up what we are doing is we're
trying to eventually update something in
the database right if we click on ricoh
nasty that goes from one
to two
when i click that thumbs up a request
made it all the way from my my my app
here
to my server
from my server we sent a request to the
mongodb database the mongodb database
went from
one to two
and then we took all that data
we put that from one to two and then we
sent back to the browser everything went
okay
the browser refresh which is a get
request and now we see the update it too
and it all happened like that doesn't
that blow your mind like come on let's
just think about this for a second right
hold on let's click on polo g here three
two one
look how quick that was
look how quick like what
let's come on let's think about that
all right
i clicked on the thumbs up
what heard that click
what's the only thing that could hear
that click
maybe i should show chat
was the only thing that could that could
hear that click
yeah our client-side javascript
our client-side javascript heard that
click
and once it heard the click
it triggered a fetch
to my server
the server
had some code running on it that heard
that fetch request from my client
and part of the code that got triggered
to run when it heard that request was to
go to our database
find
the polo g
document
update it from two
to one
and then
respond back to the fetch saying it went
okay
and then the page refreshed
making a get request from the from the
client to the server the server
heard that request it has some
instructions part of the instructions
was to go to the database
find all the documents this time
plug them into ejs
the ejs spits out the html and then it
responds
all the way back to our client
what
look how fast hold on three two one
look at that doesn't blow there's
nothing else i can do to blow your mind
other than that
right nothing i can do to blow your mind
other than that so
that's what we're talking about today
tonight we're going to step through
the creating the reading the updating
and then the last one that we talked
about
is the deleting right we know that if we
click this trash can it's almost the
same thing that happens when we click
the thumbs up but instead of it being an
update request it's a delete request
same thing still happens we go the api
hears the request
we go to the database we remove a
document instead of updating a document
we remove a document we respond thing
everything went okay the page refreshes
we make a get request the git request
goes against all the documents there's a
document missing now
we pipe all the documents into the egs
the egypt spits out html html we respond
with
like the fact that this all happens
and that i can
code it
and i can make it happen like what
blows my mind so let's get into it let's
step through each of these individual
pieces let's put the u in crud as well
then we're going to look at kind of all
the other little accessory things that
we need for this to function and we'll
call it a break
and the fact that we know it exactly
let's go turn up
all right
so we introduced two new bits of
technology to make this app work on
tuesday
the first bit was a mongodb mongodb is
the database we used in the beginning
because it just helps us build full
stack web applications and the beauty of
mongodb is if you know how to interact
with objects
you know how to interact with mongodb
mongodb is made up of collections of
documents right collections of documents
but those documents are really just what
yeah they're they're just objects
they're really just objects
beautiful
just objects
cool and so when we put stuff into the
into the collection we're really just
putting objects into the collection and
when we get stuff out of the collection
really just getting objects out of the
collection so if we know how to work
with objects we know how to work with
mangadb and that makes it a great first
database when you're using javascript
cool so we have mongodb made up of
collections full of documents those
documents are really just objects
hey what's going on here
those are really just objects so we
introduced that
and we also introduced this concept
called e j s it's in the game so ejs is
simply a what it's just a it's a it's a
what just like our mad libs were just
like our html5 up was
egs is just a what
just a template right it's just a
template
right it's just a template and like any
template we can plug stuff in
and the cool thing about this template
is we can plug in all of our data and at
the end the ejs
just spits out regular html so a lot of
folks when they first see ejs they get a
little they get a little
they get a little twisted at first
because they're like leon
this looks like you're mixing javascript
in html
no egs is its own thing ejs has its own
syntax right its own
rules and rhymes for how you write that
code
it just looks like html and it just
looks like javascript for our
convenience
thank you ejs for making it convenient
for me to write ejs right
so the cool thing here is that if you
know your javascript and you learn a
little bit about like this syntax they
use like the carrots and the
modulus or percent sign if you learn a
little bit of syntax you can build
whatever you want inside of this ejs and
the cool thing is it's really just
javascript right it's really just
javascript and so the cool thing is that
we can use the javascript that we
already know
to
do things in a dynamic way we can plug
in our data instead of things being
hard-coded we can generate as many let's
say li's as we wanted if we look at this
app did i know
that there were going to be five rappers
at the end
did i know there were going to be five
wrappers at the end
no
there was no way i knew how many
wrappers there were going to be so there
was no way i could have just hard coded
html i could have tried i could have
totally hardcoded html that we respond
with but that's not what we want to do
going forward we're going to be able to
get data from our mongodb database and
plug it into a template
and that template we want to be able to
spit out html and so that's exactly
what's happening with our ejs we're able
to pull in data
and once we have that data we can build
out individual elements of our html and
then once the ejs is done running it's
run through all of our data it's
generated all these elements it just
spits out a regular html file so no i am
not mixing javascript and html because
the end result is to spit out html
how is this different than appending
childs with click events uh well do
those children persist after you refresh
if we had a click events and we were
just appending children like let's say
we're doing a to-do list which we'll do
after break we're building a to-do list
and we're just appending children with
click events
does that does that stay once we refresh
no
because the data was only client-side
what this is a full stack web
application where our data is persistent
meaning that we can always go and get it
it's stored in our database right
and so we're able to pull data from our
database plug it into this template and
as we refresh like look i'll go back
boom i'll refresh i'll refresh i'll
refresh i'll refresh that data's staying
there because it's not local it's going
to the database each time to get this
data every single time i refresh boom i
refreshed it went to the database it got
all the documents out of my database
plugged it into my ejs and that ejs spit
out html and that's the html that you
see loading that's happening every
single
time i refresh
what up gl4
what are the limits of local storage
that it's local
what if i want everyone to be able to
use this application
if we're just storing stuff local on
your local host everyone's going to have
a different set of wrappers
right
everyone will have a different set of
rappers
right
alrighty
so
we add it to the mix
this mongodb
and we add it to the mix
this ejs
let's talk through
the getting the posting the putting and
deleting
with this graphic
then we will
go piece by piece
drawing it out and then looking at the
underlying code
right so we're going to see it step by
step not only this piece but the
underlying code as well so
if we're looking at this document or
sorry this application and i click
refresh
what type of request have i just made i
just click refresh
what type of requests have i just made
i made a get request right a read a get
or a read
and so if we're following along this
pattern
what happened when we clicked refresh
we clicked refresh
that get request
made its way to the server
there was some code
running on our server that was set up to
hear that get request just like we could
have click events
that would listen for clicks this code
running on our server called the api was
set up to hear that get request now
how many get requests could we really
have in our api
how many git requests could we have as
part of our api
as many as i want exactly infinite we
got as many get requests as we want
now how do i differentiate between the
different get requests
what if i went to localhost 2121 slash
pokemon
right how do i tell the difference
between these get requests yeah the
routes i see certainly it's the routes
so when i click refresh
on this page look at look at the look at
the url
what is this route when i click refresh
what's the route here
it's a forward slash yeah that's the
default route it's root it's the root
route right and so we don't see it but
it's there it's the default so when i
refreshed
that git request left my client side
made it to my server
the server heard the get request
right
heard the get request
it made sure that it was this route
and then it had some code
to do what it needed to do it had some
instructions to follow so i heard the
get request and once it heard the get
requests the first thing that it did
is it went to
our [__] database
and it found all the wrappers
in my rapper's collection
right
love andre all right we heard all the we
got all the wrappers in the rapper's
collection
each one of these documents represented
a different rapper object in my
collection so we got all those wrappers
from the database right
we took all of that data
and we plugged it into our ejs template
what did our ejs template spit out
yep it spit out
html and that html is what we responded
with
so all those steps happened
we heard the request
we went to the database to find all the
wrappers we got all the wrappers we
plugged them into the ejs we wound up
creating an li for each one of the
wrappers when it was done generating all
that content it spilled out a singular
html file
and then
responded right
respond it with that html file
cool
all right now
we're gonna take our break because at
the top of the hour when we come back
we're going to walk through the the post
the put the delete
then we're going to go step by step
we're going to write it out again we're
going to look at the underlying code for
each one of these see how everything
connects we're gonna take a look at the
the [__] database live be able to see
all the content that's in the database
we're gonna connect all these dots that
by the end of tonight's class you should
understand how to build an app that can
create read update and delete
cool
we got to add jasper's two minutes
that's right
so we're gonna do a seven minute break
uh if you're able please get up move
around hydrate
when we get back we're gonna keep
jumping into this we're gonna make it
make sense we're gonna get into the code
give me your all tonight put it all in
the line for me tonight because you got
a two-week break after this
give me give me every give give me every
ounce of focus and attention you have
uh and uh
i'll give you two weeks to recover
and walk through each bit then we're
gonna see it each with inside the code
and that way you have
the raw materials you need to build
these applications should you want to
build something over break
i'm thinking of making an app similar to
ig for my 100 hours project you think
it's reasonable project absolutely yeah
i mean we're gonna build something very
similar uh together like we're gonna
build a clone uh together so um
yeah you'll have everything you need
because we'll do it
music
music error sue added two more minutes
we're gonna add that to the next timer
so our next break will be seven minutes
as well
all right so we will not typically be
hard coding html css in real job
scenarios yeah a lot of time you're not
really hard-coding html or css anymore
you're using a templating language
you're using components by something
like react so yeah it's um you still
have to know what html and css is right
um but uh you won't really probably be
writing that from scratch
alrighty so we talked about the get
let's talk about the post
uh what's the the post or the create
here
for this application again
uh
curb said why does index.ejs have an ejs
extension rather than html
because it's not html right it's easy
it's its own thing called ejs and ejs
spits out html but it itself is not html
it just so happens that it it renders
out html remember when we look in the
express we're going to see that it
renders ejs and it renders out an html
file
is ejs front end yes it's still
technically part of our front end code
but we're full stack developers so right
now we're do we're handling both the
front end
and the back end at the same time
and eventually we're gonna add more
organization to our code via some
architectures like mvc and that's why
right now all of our ejs files are in a
folder called views but we're not there
yet
we'll add that layer of complexity and
organization as we get a little bit
further in but there is this idea that
right now we're building full stack
we're in front of we're in charge of the
front end
and the back end
but when you join your next company you
you might only focus on one
cool all right so folks said it right
it's the form it's how we do our posting
so if we were to fill out this form
uh somebody get uh we did have baby keem
on here let's do baby keem again
so baby keem
we're gonna add
grab the birth name
boom
and so i'm gonna go ahead i'm gonna
enter it in here i'm gonna hit submit
boom
as soon as i click submit
i have submitted
what type of request to the server
i submitted what kind of request to the
server
post yeah i made a post request and so
our application is set up to hear that
post request by submitting the form
we made a post request to the server
our server is set up to hear that post
request now
how many post requests could our api be
set up to here remember the api is the
code that's listening for that request
how many post requests could it be set
up to here
as many as we want it so how do we
differentiate between all the different
forms what if i had 10 different forms
on this page how would i know
what post i was listening for
different routes exactly
and the route for the form
comes from where do we remember this
from last class the route for the form
comes from where
the action exactly the action so
on this form if we go back and look hold
on let's go to our i'm going to do it
right here
inspect
if we look at this form
we can see this form has an action of
add wrapper
so i'm going to listen to a post
that's coming from the ad wrapper
form right
add wrapper is the action i'm gonna be
listening for a post
from that form
i could
have
a dozen different forms all with
different actions that my api could hear
and listen for so we submitted a form
that request made it to the server it
was a post request
our code
our api code heard that post request it
had the correct route
and once it heard that request
it did some things
the first thing it did is it went to the
database
it found our rapper's collection
right found our wrappers collection
and it inserted one new collection and
inserted one new collection
and where did the data
for this new collect this new document
come from we inserted a new document
into this wrapper's collection where did
the data for for this new document come
from
yeah from the form
all the stuff
that was in this form
right all the stuff that was in this
form
gets sent with the request we saw that
massive request body that came through
and a part of that request body was all
the information that was filled in in
this form and so we were able to take
all of that data
to create a new document
in our collection
right and then once we had put that new
document in our collection what did we
do
we responded right we responded we said
hey
we responded and said hey
everything went okay exactly what
you asked to happen
happened
and then we
refreshed exactly i see you chat then we
refreshed and when we refreshed
we made a what requests
made a new what kind of request
we made a new get request
that get request went to
the database this time however there was
a new document inside of that collection
so when we got all this data
and we put it into the ejs file the ejs
file had to create one more li
which spit out new html
that html had that additional li
and that's what we respond with and
that's why we're able to see
baby keem show
up it was two steps it was a post that
put that document into the wrappers
collection in our database and then it
was a git that went back to the database
to get all that data plug it into ejs
spit out html and respond with that html
it's so fast well it is it's wild it's
mind-blowing
so zilby said does ejs
re-render on every refresh yes the way
we have it set up right now it's it's
we're refreshing on everything we're
re-rendering on everything eventually we
won't we'll do it slightly different
ways but yeah for now it is
cool
react will be a way that we might handle
some things differently
there are ways to do things
asynchronously that we haven't covered
yet but for now i want the raw request
marinating in your brain
all right
so we've created we've read it
we're going to skip update because we
haven't talked about that then we're
going to talk about delete so delete
what are we doing for deleting here
what's the deleting thing here
prod by moose said is react better than
egs you're never really going to hear me
say something is better than something
else it's very rare that i'm going to
say one thing is better than something
else
because they're different tools for
different jobs
right
right they're different tools for
different jobs and so i like putting as
many tools on my tool belt as possible
but i'm never going to look at a hammer
and say you know what hammer you're
better than my screwdriver right
this is just not something that would be
like i would like i'm not gonna be like
oh yeah i'm like i might prefer my
hammer or hey i might prefer my hammer
i'm not going to tell my hammer that
it's better than my screwdriver right so
i i think that the the better is kind of
interesting there
we will use tools that solve more and
more of our problems
right now there's not a lot of stuff
that's really kind of updating there's
really nothing we're going to call state
eventually other than these likes so
it's not something we really need to
bring react into the mix yet but once we
get to applications
let's say like facebook that have all
these different things that are
happening your your number of followers
are going up your legs are going up
people are logging in out like i want
you to keep track of all these little
changes there are things that can make
your life a lot easier and react is one
of those things
so we'll get to it eventually but for
now no
all right the deleting yes we said the
deleting was clicking the trash can
right when we click the trash can
there's some stuff that happens
what hears that click
yeah our smurf
hanging out on the block by himself
i really
i
new people that join us are just screwed
sometimes some of some of the references
we throw out there if you're new or a
little a little wild i i understand
yeah so our smurf is just sitting out
there it's our client-side javascript
it's our event listener our event
listener's just chilling on
that trash can waiting to be clicked
and that client-side javascript here's
that click
and it makes a what what what what's
what is the only thing that we've seen
client-side that can make a request to a
server the only thing that we've done
that we've used time and time again is a
what
chat stop trying to make fetch happen
it is a fetch though
it is a fetch right we click that trash
can and in the client-side javascript is
a fetch request that makes its way to
our server
right
and
that request
leaves the client side makes it to our
server the api is set up to hear that
request there's a delete we gave it a
specific route so we know we're
listening to the right delete
and what that's going to do
is that request is going to be sent to
our database
we're going to look inside of our
wrappers collection
and we are going to
delete
one of the posts or one of the documents
from the collection
all right we we we heard the delete
request we wrote the code that went to
the database found the document deleted
it and then what do we do
what do we do after we delete the
document from the collection
we respond
saying everything went okay
and then
we refresh
and when we refresh that makes a new get
request
that get request goes to the database
and finds the rapper's collection
however this time when it goes to the
rapper's collection it's missing the
document that we deleted
and we pass this stuff
into the ejs which spits out html and
the html is short in li that we respond
with
solarz hey welcome
glad you're joining us
cool
cool cool cool cool cool
um
someone said how does it know what to
delete that was interesting good
question how does it know what to delete
when we click the trash can
when we click the trash can we're making
a fetch
but remember the fetches that you did
remember the features that you did with
your apis right you can always send
information with a fetch
and so what we're able to do is we're
able to send some information along with
the fetch
and what we did is we sent
baby keem along with the fetch
and so when our api
was trying to do its deleting it
actually went to the database and found
the document that was baby keem and
deleted it because we with our fetch we
sent
the information that we wanted to be
deleted and so it had to go find that
document that had that name to delete it
so we're gonna see that like i said
we're gonna take a look at um
all the code today i want to really make
sure that we understand what's happening
remember
this class in last class is all about
the like the why not the nitty-gritty
remember we're we're committing to using
understanding and then building so we're
using right we're using all these pieces
and maybe through a little bit of that
using we'll start to understand a little
bit and then we'll be eventually able to
build with it when we come back we'll be
building these apps from scratch one of
the very first apps we're gonna build is
a to-do list from scratch we'll handle
all the client side code all the server
side code all of the routes our api
everything from scratch so tonight's not
that night we're trying to understand
what's happening underneath the hood and
if we can walk away understanding what's
happening with the hood we're in a good
spot
so the client side is doing the fetch
and the back end is doing the delete yes
pie exactly
cool
alrighty
so we talked about the creating the
reading the deleting
but what's the thing doing the updating
in this application
the likes yeah
each one of our wrappers has a certain
number of likes
associated with its document
and so what we're doing here
is when somebody clicks on the thumbs up
right when we click on the thumbs up
that client-side javascript here is the
click
and it makes a fetch
right
and this time the fetch
is also sending along
not only the the information about the
person
but the number of likes so all that data
is sent
as part of the fetch right all that data
gets sent as part of the fetch
and so we make that request the the put
request or the update request to our
server there's a part of our api that's
set up for that request
and it's going to go to our database
it's going to find the document that had
that match of baby keem their birth name
and the zero likes
and it's gonna take that number of likes
and add one to it so that it goes from
zero
to one
then what's it going to do
it's going to
respond
it's going to respond and it's going to
respond saying everything went okay
and then it's going to
refresh
and this time when it refreshes it's
going to make a get request to the
server it's going to go to the database
find the collections
find the documents inside the
collections we're going to notice that
one collection is no longer zero
it is now
one
all that data gets put into the ejs baby
keems li the update now is not zero it's
one
that's without html that has the one and
we respond
and we respond
how are respond and refresh different
respond to something that the server
does refreshing is something that the
client does so the client can refresh
like when you refresh the page the
client can do that the server is just
listening to requests and sending
responses
somebody said but leon that's not secure
it's not we're here to learn we're not
here to write performance secure code
yet
yeah
the reason why this wouldn't be um
secure is because
we're yoinking stuff from the dumb
right right now we're yoinking stuff
from the dom
but um
we can always just come in and edit the
dom right
cool
right so we we could do that like
yoinking
right where we where we change the stuff
that's happening right and that could
impact i don't know if that's how i have
it set up right now but there is ways to
do that
but we're not here to worry about that
yet
that's some record card adjusting right
here yeah it is
how does the api know who is liking the
rapper it doesn't know right now so
right now it doesn't matter it doesn't
know who's liking it at all eventually
we'll have logged in users and we'll be
able to tell who is liking what but for
right now anybody that had access to
uh this application and whose ip address
was
listed on my mongodb instant could do
these updating
what if we want to delete from an api
that isn't ours well hopefully we can't
do that
hopefully we can't do that
so a unique ip address can only like
each name once no no we don't have any
of that stuff built up yet right now um
right now the the way that mongodb works
is that you can either set it so that
only your ip address is able to update
stuff or you can set it to multiple ip
addresses or you can whitelist it so
that any ip address can make changes and
this makes a lot of sense because
we are going to put our code
on uh let's say like a heroku server
right we're gonna put all of our code on
a heroku server
do we want any other server besides that
heroku server to be able to talk to our
mongodb database
do we want any other server besides the
heroku server to be able to talk to our
database
no
so we would just whitelist the heroku
server's ip address
and then that way we don't ever worry
about somebody else accessing our
database
cool
how does heroku defend against viruses
no idea that's why we use heroku though
we could roll our own metal right back
in the day instead of paying for
somebody's server right let's talk about
this is a really great
why would we put our code on heroku
let's talk about it so back in the day
one of my first companies
what i did is i had a server
drilled into the cement
right it was literally drilled like
there was like a computer connected to
the internet that was drilled into the
cement so that somebody couldn't like
steal it
right
and that server served up
the the the website or the application
sorry
and um
what were the downsides of me rolling my
own metal where i had like my server
cemented into the ground
what were some what were some of the
downsides of that
what if it floods great question if it
flooded my server would go down um if
the hard drive failed in the middle of
the night what did i have to go do
i would have to get up get my ass all
the way back to the office pull out the
drive put the hard drive back in
right
what if the power went out
right what if the power went out well i
better go figure out my redundant power
system to bring the server back online
so back in the day it's what we used to
do
i rather pay someone to host my code so
i don't have to worry about any of that
right i don't have to worry about
the power going out i don't have to
worry about um
a hard drive failing i don't have to
worry about
do i have a good enough ether like a
good enough internet connection
right all that stuff i i hand off to
somebody else
right and that's why i put my stuff on
her heroku handles all of that stuff
plus makes it easier for my application
to scale because i need more and more
resources it's easier and easier to get
more and more computers that can host my
code
right so
that's why we'll use services like aws
it will use server services like heroku
will use
azure to host our code so we don't have
to handle all that crap also what's
something that's really cool about
putting our code
on these servers well these servers are
great they have really good connections
but there might also be closer to our
users we could have a server let's say
in
dallas or chicago or someplace that's
like equidistant to all of our users or
we can keep track of our analytics and
see that like 80 of our users are in new
york well then better better we probably
should put our server in new york right
and so a lot of these bigger companies
have servers all around the world where
you can put your stuff on there so
we'll talk about that much in the future
where we talk about cdns we talk about
distributing our code across multiple
servers we're not there yet but
for folks that are saying like leon why
are we using heroku why are we putting
our code there well so we have to worry
about it it just runs and it does it all
for us
cool
all right so
we talked through the creating the
reading the updating and the deleting
but what i want to do now is i want to
look at the code for each of these
i want to look at the code for each of
these
um
is heroku trustworthy yeah heroku is
used by a lot of really really big
big organizations have been around for a
very long time but remember it's just
somebody else's computer there's nothing
special about the cloud it's just
somebody else's computer um
whoever
whoever you're using aws
heroku whatever it is um
it's just somebody else's computer
i think somebody asked and asked leon i
haven't had a chance to respond to it
they're like do we still own our code
yeah you still own your code um you're
just using their metal yep
what if they get flooded well they
thought through that a lot of these big
server companies put a lot of time and
effort into making sure that their
servers are secure because that's real
money for them if they got flooded then
they're out so they'll put them in
above the floodplain right they'll put
their stuff above the floodplain
they'll have redundancy
they'll have backup power systems
they have a lot of a lot of stuff that
makes it so that when they build out
a huge
um
data center that they thought through
all this stuff
i've had the privilege to be in a lot of
data centers
uh one of my favorite is uh
if you're from boston uh
one of the biggest like one of the
biggest server farms on the east coast
is underneath the macy's in downtown
boston
and whenever i would walk by the macy's
there are always these like debo looking
like security guards like fully strapped
up like they they got they had like not
only like like
full like full like ar platforms like
hanging in front of them like just just
strapped up
and so i was always like damn like
people really be out here shoplifting
from macy's and uh they i don't know i
don't know why they need these devo
security guards but then i found out
that
they're actually protecting the data
center that's underneath macy's they're
they they weren't there to protect
macy's they protect the servers that are
below the macy's which i thought was
just like is pretty funny and if you
actually look it up on google earth
you'll see like all these redundant
power systems on the roof and stuff it's
pretty wild
you know
yeah
so i guess it gets pretty spicy the
the
the lengths they'll go through to
protect the the data and the servers
yeah
and protect macy's at all costs
all right so
what i want to do now
is i want to look through
each one of these see the code
underneath of it look at all the
accessories that make it run and then we
should be in a really good spot for you
to maybe build an app or two on your own
over break
all right so
here we want to talk about the reading i
think this is the easiest one to start
with it combines a lot of stuff that we
need to know so
we want to do the reading so i want to
go ahead and refresh the page right so i
refresh the page what happens when i
refresh the page well
from the client
right a request makes it to a server
and we have some code
running on our server which we call our
api
that hears that request
right and so we'll see something like
app
dot get
and we'll have the route in this case
since we're on the main route localhost
2121 uh the default route is that
forward slash the route route
then once we hear that request
there are steps that we're going to have
pre-written for what should happen
and the first thing that's going to
happen is we're going to go to our
database
we're going to find our collection
called wrappers
and once we go to that collection we're
gonna find all the documents right so
that request leaves our server
and it goes to our mongodb
atlas database
and on that database there is a rapper's
collection
and inside that rapper's collection
right into that wrapper's collection is
a bunch of
documents
right a bunch of
and what we're going to do is we're
going to get all of these documents but
each one of these documents is a what
chat each one of these documents is a
what
is an object and what's the only thing
that we know that can hold all these
objects
not the only well maybe what we know
an array so what we do is we say you
know what
turn all this into an array and so we
get all of these documents back
and we put them into an array so we have
this array of
objects
right we have this array of objects
and once we have this array of objects
where are we going to pass this array of
objects to
where we're going to pass this array of
yeah we're going to pass it
into our
ejs
and our ejs is going to take all of
these objects the egs is going to loop
through them take the data out plug it
into an li
br bill out all these lis and when it's
done rendering what does ejs spit out
when the eges is done rendering what
does it spit out
yeah it spits out html
so it spits out some html
and the last thing we do with this html
is what what do we do with it
yeah we respond with it we respond with
this html
back to the client so that we can see
the lovely page that we see here
cool
let's go ahead and take a look at the
code that powers that get request as
part of our api
all right so here it is
here's the code
right here's the code don't don't stress
about it let's take a look
we can see if we just go ahead and
delete this for a second we can see the
normal structure
right we can see the structure all right
app.get
this is express doing the heavy lifting
for us
right
express is doing the heavy lifting force
it heard the get request and when it
hears the get request it fires this
function
the two things that it passes into this
is everything that it knows about the
request
and everything that it knows about the
res well eventually everything will know
about the response
right so
we hear that get
and we fire this function
just like click events where we heard
the event and we did the the following
function this is the exact same thing
here
so
what do we do
when we hear that get request well we
decide to go to our database i'm going
to show how we connect it to our
database in a little bit later tonight
we go to our database
we find the collections wrappers let's
take a look at our database and let's
look at the collection of wrappers
all right let's take a look
if we look at our database here's our
database
here's our collection of wrappers
and we can see all of the objects or
documents that are inside of this
wrapper's collection so what we decided
to do
what we decided to do what we decided to
do
is
find
all those documents
and once we had all those documents all
of those
objects right
right all of those objects we turned
them into an array
right so now we're chilling
with an array of objects
and if we know anything about how like
we get responses back from stuff we know
this is probably a promise and then this
then
is going to run
once this is done doing its job remember
this is something that's happening
asynchronously it has to go to a whole
other database out there on the internet
find our mongodb atlas like database
find the rapper's collection find all
the documents turn them into an array
and respond with all that data well all
that data that array of objects will be
passed into the word data so wherever i
see
right wherever i see data is really my
array of objects it's all it is
so
wherever i see data i see data down here
it's really this array of objects that i
got back from the database right it's
just all the objects that i got back
right
now
what am i eventually going to do
with this data i got all this data back
from the mongodb database i got all of
these documents all these individual
wrappers i got back from the mangady
database what am i going to do with all
of these
objects that are sitting in my array
well the beautiful thing about
about express is we had a send file
method we had a json method we have also
a render method and so
we can tell
it to render our ejs
using this data
so we're going to pass this data
into my ejs template
what is going to be the name of my data
what's the name i'm going to use to
represent all this data inside of my ejs
template
i'm going to look inside this ejs
template and i'm going to give i'm going
to it's going to be represented by a
name
yeah here we go info
info is the name of all the data i'm
gonna pass in all of my wrappers all of
those objects so wherever i see info
it's really that array of objects it's
really all the wrappers
right and so let's go ahead and take a
look
inside of our ejs
and see if we can see where we're using
that info
all right here we go we have this thing
that looks like a it looks like a for
loop but it's the ejs syntax right the
loop and so we know it's going to loop
through and each time it loops through
it's going to create an li and the cool
thing is that info is holding all of our
documents so let's go and take a look at
our database
there are one two
three four
five documents that came back from this
database right five documents that came
back so how many times is this loop
going to run
gonna run five times if there were five
documents in our database is gonna run
five times and each time what we're
gonna do is we're gonna pull off
the information for each one of those
objects so what it really was it was an
array
it was an array that had objects in it
and each one of those objects has a
stage name
that has a birth name
and it has a number of likes
right
there it's just a bunch of objects that
have the same stuff page name
earth name
likes
page name
birth name
likes right it's just it's just an array
full of those objects
right so the very first time this runs
info will be zero
info will be zero and so we're going to
use the square bracket notation to go
ahead and grab
this first object out of the array
we can grab the stage name off of it the
birth name and the likes and so if we
look at our application we can see that
that was
21 savage their birth name and one like
then this ran again but now i
is one
and so instead of it grabbing this one
it goes and grabs the next object and we
pull off the stage name the birth name
and the likes which if we look at it was
chance the rapper please say the rapper
their birth name and
one
then it's gonna run again and i is gonna
be two
and instead of it grabbing this one or
this one it's gonna grab
the next one
and we're gonna grab the stage name the
birth name and the likes and we're gonna
plug those in and that's how we wind up
getting
polo g their birth name and four
and it's going to do this two more times
grabbing the content out of those
objects to build out this li
and once this is all said and done once
we have fully rendered our ejs
what do we wind up with
it spits out some html
and we
respond
with that html
right we respond with that html
and that is how we are able to see all
of these wrappers that were inside of
our database that's how we're able to
see them here on the client side
this was not hard-coded this is we went
and got data from the database we
plugged it into a template that
templates spit out html and we respond
with the html that we're seeing now
every single time right every single
time that we refresh it's doing that
same process again every single time i
hit enter it's doing that same process
again
uh your code on github uh your code on
github why do you
why do the likes start at negative one i
think you're maybe referring to
something i did
here that i took out just because i
think it's it's just a little extra i'm
telling you express makes our lives so
much easier using mongodb is so amazing
because it just makes our lives easier
right now
are my wrappers sorted in any way
no
what's something that we might want to
sort them by
likes yeah i think likes make the most
sense here we don't
we don't somebody said age we don't have
their age here right we have their legs
though so
uh instead of having instead of having
to figure out some
big brain query you ready for this
dot sort
and then we tell it what we want to sort
by it's just an object that we pass in
so i'll say likes
and do i want to sort in ascending which
would be one
or descending which would be negative
one
so i want to sort in descending from
biggest to smallest or greatest to least
and so i just plug that in i gotta
restart my server
please say the server
and let's go back and refresh
and now our
our stuff is sorted
yes
right because what happened now
is when it went to the database
it still went to the database it still
found all the wrappers it still found
all the documents
but it decided to sort those documents
for us from the likes from greatest to
least
before it handed us them in the array
right and so like
it just it's just plain language right
it's just plain language
and so that's why i love this it's like
you start to think through all the
things that you might want to do and you
find time and time again it's pretty
readable the things that you want to do
what does negative one mean here it's
just how do you want to sort it
one would be um here let me show you so
negative one we can see it goes from
four to one one one but if i change this
to just regular one it's gonna go the
other way
so let me stop and restart my server
and now it's going to go the other way
when i refresh so now it's going from
one to four right so it's descending
versus ascending
so i wanted it to descend so i put
negative one there
all right
leon how will we google something like
this
let's try it
um
[__]
bb
sort
so this is kind of like mongodb telling
you how to do it right at the jump
um
there's a bunch here let's just let's
just take a look at it
tells us sort
um this is doing aggregate though so
let's see if there's something just
regular
i'll see where it says sort
i don't know i don't see where it says
start so i would go back
oh there we go super simple
sort
field name
and then order
and it's telling us here that you can do
one or minus one
so that was what i don't know
less than a minute
to find it right
and so notice what i did like
the docs didn't really help me right so
i was like i don't know this this is
this is you're using a lot of big words
here it's too complicated so i just went
back
right you don't have to
you don't have to always do the that
like and i just went down the list i was
like oh this one seems okay let's see
and then oh right there boom sort
all right right a little bit more above
and below it and saw one minus one
that's it
so i think a lot of folks they they
spend too much time
like they spend too much time like when
you see something like this i'm not
going to spend my time look what no
using a lot of big words using a lot of
the hand not for me and i go back i
think that's one of the
leon what's the difference between uh
senior
[Music]
and entry level
yeah that's it right there
i know when to move on
i know when i'm being disrespected and i
move on i don't i don't stick it out
all right so
we did the get
let's take a look at the
post
um but we're gonna do that after we come
back from our break
we have a seven minute break thanks to
music
see our
su
uh so we're going to put seven minutes
on the clock here when we come back
we're gonna see the posts
the delete and finally the put and then
we're gonna take a look at all this
other stuff like how i'm connecting to
the database
um what the heck all this stuff means
and then we'll end for the evening and
go into a beautiful two-week break all
right let's go ahead and
put seven minutes on the clock here we
talked about the
creating sorry the reading let's talk
about the creating so
if we look we're able to enter in a
rapper's name
stage name and birth name and submit
right
right and submit when we submit it
let's get myself a little blank slot
here when we submit it
we were able to make a request
from our client side
that request made it to our server
that server had some code running on it
that we call our api and that api was
set up to hear
the post
now the route for that post came from
the action on the form which we'll see
again in a second
and when it heard that
that correct action
and it was on the post it did some stuff
the very first thing that it did
is it went to our database
it found the rapper's
collection
and in that rapper's collection we added
a new document
with the new info
that came along with the request
from the form
all right
once we added that new document we
inserted that document into the wrappers
collection
the only thing that we did
was we responded okay
and asked for the page to refresh
and it was the refreshing
that made the get request
that eventually found its way to the
rapper's collection and saw the new
document that we just created put that
document into the ejs and that's how we
were able to see the updating or sorry
the the addition of the new wrapper
but all the creating all that creating
did was put that new document in our
database we had to still do another get
request to be able to see it
all right
so if we look
here is our post
we know that the post request is coming
from this form if we look this form when
it submits it has an action of add
wrapper so our api is set up to hear a
post
from that ad wrapper route
cool when it hears that ad wrapper route
that post it runs this code
and all we're doing is we're going to
the database
we're finding the rapper's collection
and we're inserting a new
document into that collection i love
express because if i want to insert a
new document it's just insert one and
i've inserted a new document
what i'm going to do
is i'm creating the document that i want
to put into that collection if we look
if we look at our documents that are
inside the collection we'll see that
they have a stage name
a birth name
and a number of likes
stage name birth name and likes came
from us
we told it what to put in the database
and we see that here
we say
stage name
birth name
and likes we are we are hard coding what
those properties are going to be
in the document in our collection in our
database now
the value that each of those had right
we saw that the value will be different
depending on what was entered into the
form
in the
polo g instance we entered in polo g as
the stage name and we entered in their
birth name into the birth name slot and
we clicked submit
that request made its way to our server
and we were able to pull off polo g and
able to pull off the birth name by
looking at the requests that came when
we submitted the form because when we
submit that form we send a big old
request and at the very bottom of that
request is a request of body that comes
from
the form and we're gonna be able to see
in that request body
properties that have the name that we
describe here
whatever we call this here is what shows
up on the body so let's see that one
more time i know we saw it last class
but i want to show you that it really is
the request that is coming through that
has it so
i am going to console.log
the whole request
right so we can see it let's console.log
let's uh start and start our server
again
and
let's go ahead and enter in a new rapper
it might give me another wrapper
i actually already have one pulled up
rizza
let's go ahead and do rizza
the drizzle
all right there we go
cool
boom
we're gonna submit
great i submit it
right i submit it
right
i submit it
and if we go back and look
look at all this crap that we console
logged as the request when we submitted
that form
when we submitted that form
right when we submitted that form
all this crap gets sent with that
request all this stuff gets sent with
the request and we're gonna notice that
there's also this request body
the stage name property and the birth
name property came from the form if we
look the form has a name of stage name
right this name
is being used here
this birth name
is being used here whatever the user
entered
the stage name from the body was rizza
and the birth name from the body
was robert
right so we're able to say you know what
hey
with this request
give me the body
and give me the stage name that's part
of the body give me the birth name
that's part of the body right
and so that's why when we look at our
server we are saying
request
dot body dot stage name grabbing rizza
out of the request that was sent right
grabbing robert out of the request that
was sent it's all coming from the form
because it's all coming along with the
request
boom
all right
let's let's get rid of this console log
because i don't want to have to keep
console logging in this every single
time
all right
so now
we
got the stage name from the form
we got the birth name from the form and
we decided to also hard code a number of
likes
and what winds up happening
what winds up happening is we insert
this object as the document
into our rapper's collection so if we go
and look at our rapper's collection
right now
we expect to see a new document that has
the stage name of rizza
the birth name of robert and the likes
of xero that we hard coded we hardcode
the number of likes right that's what we
expect to go see let's go look at our
our
database here
let's refresh our collection
and we should see in this collection at
the bottom
yes there's a stage name with the value
of rizza birth name with the value of
robert and likes with the value of zero
we literally inserted this document
right we inserted this document
into
the wrappers collection
cool
that's how the one guy was everyone's
friend on myspace exactly whenever you
created a new myspace account there was
a friends
array right there was a friends array
and that array
always started off with tom
right
it always started off with tom
and so whenever you created a new
myspace account tom was already hard
coded that's exactly how it worked you
think i'm joking this is exactly what
was happening on their back end right
was that every time we created a new
user it was hardcoded to have a friend's
array that had tom already in it that's
it
cool
so once we're done
adding that new document right
now once we are done adding that new
document to the wrappers collection
our then fires
we print to the console that we've added
a wrapper just so that we can see it in
our in our terminal here and then what's
the last thing we do we we tell we tell
express to respond with the what
we tell express to respond with the what
we could respond with a send file we
could respond with a json we could
respond with a rendering of ejs but we
told it to respond with a refresh
beautiful and when we refresh
when we refresh
that triggers a new get
that git goes to our rapper's collection
and now there is a new document in a
rapper's collection that has rizza in it
cool
let's talk about the deleting
all right the deleting
when we go ahead let's get rid of rizza
for now right when we click on this
trash can
what here is that click
the smurf and where is that smurf reside
where's the smurfer's eye where's the
smurf reside
yeah it's our client-side javascript so
if we're gonna start by looking at what
happens
we need to start there so let's go to
our public file main.js here is our
client-side javascript
we can see that we have uh
we grab all of the trash cans
we add an event listener to all the
trash cans and whenever we click a trash
can we're gonna fire the delete wrapper
function so let's go down and look at
this delete wrapper function
and what it's going to do when we click
on the delete wrapper function
it's going to grab some text
it's going to grab
the name that is next to it like the
stage name
and the birth name that is next to that
trash can
let's let's add back reza just so we can
delete them
alright so let's go ahead and put
grab the birth name
boom we submitted our post requests we
made a get request and now we're seeing
them here when i click this trash can
that click event fires
we fi we fire the delete wrapper
function and the first thing we do is we
say hey
this
aka the thing we just clicked on
go up to its parent
find the first child node and find the
text inside of it
what the heck
eventually we'll use we'll use
query selector and stuff for that but i
want to see this right here so let's
take a look all right
we just clicked on the trash can let's
go ahead and take a look here in the
actual dom
inspect
here's the actual trash can
we said to go up to the what we said to
go up to the parent right so if we just
if we click here
if we click on the trash can
we go
up to the parent
which is the li
and then we're gonna look at the child
node let's take a look
it says go up to the parent which is the
li and then go to the child node
and so if we look
here is the child node
that has rizza in it
then we're going to look at the other
child node and it has robert fitzgerald
digs in it
so we grabbed rizza and robert out of
the dom
out of the dom we literally grabbed it
out of the dom because
how do we know which trash can we're
clicking on
how do we know what trash can we're
we could be clicking on polo g's we
could be clicking on chance the wrappers
how do we know which trash can we're
clicking on so we have to go
starting from the trash can we clicked
on
so we start here
we went up to the li which was the the
parent node and then we grabbed rizza
and we grabbed robert why do we need
rizza and robert what are we gonna do
with rizza and robert why are we
grabbing these out of the dom
yeah because we're eventually going to
search the database that has a document
of rizza and robert matching and when we
find that document we're going to delete
it right so right now
if there are multiple rizzas it's just
going to delete the first one
all right
in the future we won't use we won't use
the stuff that's here
what do we know about each document what
do we know about each document that's
created
they all have these unique ids see all
these unique ids that are being created
eventually we'll just use those unique
id's but we're not there yet we're
grabbing stuff from the dom we're being
wild and fast with it here and so we
went we clicked on the trash can
we went up to the li and we grabbed the
first child node and we grabbed rizza
out of it then we went
same thing again from the trashcan to
the li
to the second the well third node and we
grab the text that's inside of it
right
now
could we have done query selector
could we have used ids could we have
used classes yes
yes to all of those things but i want to
show you the wild way first and when we
come back from break i'll show you the
cleaner way all right this is in a lot
of code bases i've seen this a lot and
so i need you to know what it is now
some people are saying what the heck are
child nodes
when we are looking at this stuff here
when i when i do this and i'm looking at
this
is this html
is that html
nope
that's the dom
and the dom is made up of what
the dom is made up of
nodes and all those nodes are connected
in weird ways
and so
it's not
0 1 2
like you would expect it's actually 1 3
5 7
it skips because there are things here
that aren't just the the text there are
some things that make up the nodes that
are going to be the zero where the text
is the one and so
there's things like spaces that could
throw this off there are things like
carriage returns that could throw this
off there's a lot of stuff in here like
the entering look look this is on a
different line
this is on a different line that's a
carriage return that's an enter that
might be its own node in the dom
right
that that like going to the next line
might be its own thing in the dom
right so the child nodes are a little
weird
because it's not zero one it's because
we're not really dealing with html we're
dealing with nodes
in the dom
okay so let that wash over you it's okay
we'll eventually use query selector
we'll eventually use ids and other
things but for right now all you need to
know
don't remember tonight's not about
understanding the code it's about seeing
it it's about believing
right
it's about believing
so what are we doing here
[__] all that
[__] all that when we click
when we click
when we click the trash can what are we
doing
what do we need to do
when we click the trash can we need to
grab rizza
and robert
and send that with our request to the
database right to the server i mean and
so when we click the trash can we need
to grab rizza we need to grab robert
right and we need to send that as part
of our request and if we look at our
code
that's exactly what we're doing we are
making a fetch
that is a delete request
and we are passing along as part of this
request another body
and in that body we have
rizza's name
and
robert their birth name
right we're we're plugging that in we
grabbed it from the dom
and we're plugging it in so that when we
make our request
when we make our request to the server
we can see their stage name we can see
their birth name and we can use it
right we can use it so that we can
eventually go to the database and delete
that document let's let's actually go
ahead and um
make sure we console log this request
so we're inside the delete
let's console log this request
cool
let's restart our server
all right
let's refresh the page to make sure
we're all good and i'm going to click
this trash can next to rizza
let's go and look at our server
look at all this crap that came along
with that fetch request
right
look at all this crap that came along
with the fetch request but look what we
have this time
with that request came
a new
request body
is this where data attributes come in
handy yes that's eventually where data
actuators can come in handy
right
look at it
look at this request body
there is a stage name s property
that has the value of rizza
and a birth name s property
right that has the name of robert
fitzgerald diggs that came
that came
with the fetch
from our delete look we made a fetch
that was a delete request and we sent
along with it a body
that had
rizza from the dom and robert from the
dom plugged into it so we grabbed all
that and we sent it along with the
request
right we sent it along with the request
and since we had all that information as
part of the request we could use it
we could use it to our advantage so we
said all right let's go to our database
let's go to our wrappers collection
let's delete
one
document from
that collection and we're going to
delete the document that has the stage
name of
what right now is request.body.stage
name s
what is holding what what is
dot stage request.body.stagename s
holding
it's holding grizza so it's as though we
plugged in
rizza right here
right
it's as though we plugged it in
and so we're going to look for
a document
inside of our collection that had the
stage name of rizza
and when you find the document that has
the stage name of rizza what are we
going to do to it
we're going to delete that document
we're going to delete that document and
when we're done deleting that document
we're going to respond
back to the fetch we're going to respond
back to the fetch saying hey we deleted
that wrapper we handle it you need me to
delete that rapper i handled it right i
got you
and so that fetch
here's the response
and what the heck do we do
what the heck do we do after we get the
response that we deleted the wrapper
from the from the database we refresh
which is going to trigger a new get
request
this get request is going to go to the
database find the wrappers find all the
documents for each wrapper but this time
it is missing one rizza is now gone and
so when we spit out our html from the
ejs we no longer have them
so if we step back and we think about
what happened
right if we think about what happened
on the client side
we had a rapper called
rizza and there was a trash can next to
them
we clicked the trash can
and when we clicked the trash can
we grabbed rizz's name
and we made a fetch
to our server
right
and part of that request
right part of that request that went to
our server was to bring this name along
with it
right to bring that name along with it
and then when we looked inside of our
app
dot
delete
what we're able to do is go to our
database
we're able to go to our rappers
collection
right and when we're in that collection
we can we can search
we can look through that collection
we can look through that collection we
can we can scroll through we're looking
for it we're looking for it we're
looking for it aha i found it
i found it here it is
delete it delete one delete it
and once we delete it
what we're going to tell to have happen
right once we delete what we're going to
tell it to have happen is we're just
going to respond
that fetch is going to hear the response
and reload the page and when it reloads
the page that document no longer exists
in our collection if i refresh
rizza is gone
no longer a document in our collection
right no longer document our collection
so when that git comes through it's
missing something
cool
all right
why are we using async await on the
client side but not server side
because it's too much extra code that
throws people off when they're first
learning about the the back end
eventually our back end code
will also be async await
it's not yet because it just adds too
much complexity to it
there is not a delete wrapper folder
this delete wrapper is how how can we
differentiate between the different
deletes
right here we have a fetch
that is a delete fetch like it's a
delete request how do we differentiate
between this delete request and any
other delete well it's the route of
delete wrapper i could call this
something different here but if i called
this something different then on my
server side i would actually have to
call this something different as well
it's just the route
we are using fetch because we don't know
which trash can we're pressing well the
only way that we can make a request from
the client side based on a click is to
make effect that's the only thing we've
ever seen so far right the only thing
we've ever the only thing that we've
ever been able to use from our
client-side javascript to make a request
was fetch that's why we're using it
are there other ways of course of course
there are
all right last one last one
is the updating
now the cool thing about updating
is that updating and deleting are going
to follow the same process
right
updating bleeding going to follow the
same process
what if there are two wrappers with the
same name
right now it would just delete the first
one in our database that had that name
we'll eventually have things that make
it so that we can have uh unique
wrappers
but that's too much to put on the table
when we're just learning
big pictures makes sense with a lot of
moving pieces exactly that's why i need
you to get the big picture tonight i
don't care if you understand like
exactly what is happening right here
that doesn't matter to me what i do care
about is that you know
that when we clicked
on
a trash can
we grabbed this info to send with our
request to the server
and we used that info
to find the document to delete from our
database i don't care how i got the info
i just need to understand that we sent a
request
with that info and we heard that request
and went to the database to delete
something based off of that
why is there a s after stage name as
just so if you're when you're coming
back and you're looking through this
code you'll see that it's a little bit
different and hopefully that little bit
difference makes you go oh
these two pieces of data are connected
uh erica said what happens if you go to
localhost 2121 delete wrapper what type
of request would that be if i went to
locos 2121
slash
delete
wrapper what type of request would that
be
a get request all right so let's go and
take a look at our server
is there a get request for that route
there's a get request for the default
route
this is a post this is a put this is a
delete are there any routes here that
would be listening for that get request
nah
cool
all right last one last one and then
we're going to look at some of the other
glue that makes this work
now once again
do i like here let's just take a look at
it real quick remember you're going to
you're going to do
leon how dare you show me this code
right you're going to do oh
right that's going to be your you're
going to be your your reactions just go
right
this is a this is how we do our update
request or our puts
now
do i have this memorized
the disrespect
[Music]
no
i've done it a lot so maybe i could type
it out but what i really have is just
like
templates on templates snippets on
snippets that i can pull
when i need to do something
right so
let's think about updating
what's the only thing that we're
updating in this application
the likes
likes and so
when i click on the thumb
next to polo g
it's almost the exact same thing that
had to happen with the delete except
we're telling it to make a different
kind of request right when we click on
this thumbs up
we need to grab
the name
the stage name the birth name
and the number of likes
and take all this data
and send it with our request
to the server
now our server is going to be set up to
hear that request
right we still have to hear that request
it's going to be an app
dot put
and when it hears that request
what are we going to do with this data
we have this stage name birth name and
number of likes that were sent what are
we going to do with this information
we send it all to the server
what are we going to do
ah yes
we're going to search the database for a
match
we're going to find a
document in our database that has the
name of polo g
the
uh
the birth name of taurus and the link
the likes of four
when i find that match
what am i going to do when i find that
match in that document in my database
what am i going to do
i'm going to whatever likes is in the
database i'm going to add one to it
and then when i'm done doing that i'm
gonna respond back saying
everything went okay
and that the page should what
refresh
and once it refreshes it'll do a normal
get however this time when it goes to
the database and it finds the likes on
polo g it'll no longer be four it'll be
five let's do it
and then take a look at it alright ready
here we go i clicked the thumbs up
we could see that it went up to five how
did this work well
when i clicked the thumbs up
there was some client-side javascript
that heard that click
and then just like before
we grabbed polo g from the dom
we grabbed their birth name from the dom
and we grabbed the number of likes from
the dom
i then took all this info
and used it to make a request
to my server
do i have a freaking clue
how to do this from scratch on my own on
the block by myself from memory
no
no no
so i didn't want to hear me cursing all
that i meant to do this
no
nope help
[__]
no
right
no way i do this from memory i just have
this sitting on my desktop when i need
to use it copy paste it boom i'm ready
to go so what i did
is
i grabbed the name their their stage
name their birth name the number of
likes and i took all this data
and i sent it as a request here's the
route here's the type of request a put
i sent all that data with the request
and that request made it all the way
here to my put
we can tell that this is the right put
because the route matches our fetch add
one like matches the route here
add one like we know where our our
request matches our api here wonderful
right
vincent i love how you beep no but let
the f-bomb fly because no is the worst
word there you really think about it
if you think about it
no it's dirtier than [__]
you know come on let's be real
let's never let someone tell us no you
can't be a software engineer no you
can't learn how to code no you can't do
it for free look at us [__] now
building full stack web applications
understanding getting posting putting
deleting
get out of here
all right
like i said if this if this makes any
sense like this is wild
if this makes any sense this is wild
right so let's let's hopefully makes a
little bit more sense all right so
we sent all that data we sent their
stage name their birth name the number
of likes and we're gonna use all that
information right here
the beautiful thing here is this update
one is
magic
it's going to find a match that has a
stage name
with polo g
a birth name with taurus
and likes with the number
four
once it finds a match in our database
right let's go to our database
let's find polo g here all right
boom
here we go found a match found a match
of stage name polo g
birth name taurus likes number four it
found that match
when it finds the match what is it going
to do
we found the match what are we gonna do
set
the likes
to whatever the likes were
plus one
set
the likes property
to whatever you passed what was number
four
plus one
so what's going to happen
is this likes property right here let's
let's watch it let's refresh it
let's refresh it
that legs property went from four
to what
the five that's it
we found the match we went to our
database we found the rapper's
collection we passed in all this info to
find the right document in that
collection find us the stage name of
polo g the birth name of taurus the
likes of four when you find that
document when you find that document set
the legs property to whatever this was
which was four plus one
there's some other stuff here
let's skip that for a second
and then we
respond we respond
right we say that we we added a like
right we added a like and if we look at
our main js
once we get that response what the heck
do we do
we refresh
and when we go and get a like
right
we go and get the new data
right and when we go and get the new
data
that new data has a likes property of
five this time and so that get goes to
the database finds all the documents
pipes them into the ejs the egas puts
out html the html this time now has
five
now
there is a bunch of other stuff here
that we're not really using right now
what if there were multiple documents in
our database
that had the same stage name same birth
name and same number of likes well we
could go ahead and say all right well
in descending order
grab the first match and just update
that one
also what if we sent a request
to find
something in our database that didn't
exist well there's this property of
upsert where if it doesn't exist if this
is true it'll just go ahead and create
it it's a really wild thing i don't i
don't you don't have to use it i'm just
showing you what it is right so
you can actually get rid of this stuff
but
what if we wanted to find what if there
are multiple instances we could find the
first one in descending order if it
didn't exist we could like create that
document on the fly it's wild stuff
there's so much more stuff here there's
so many more layers to it there are so
many other things besides set there's
set inc all these different things that
we can learn over time but it's not
useful to worry ourselves about this
stuff right now it's just understanding
the big patterns of what's happening
here now you've seen the creating you've
seen the reading you've seen the
updating you've seen the deleting and
it's all here folks it's all in this
code you can build whatever the
you want
right
with this stuff
because it's all here you could take my
code
you could take my code and just make it
something else it doesn't have to be
rappers it could be anything it's all
here
you have the power
all right
oh we got it we gotta keep that
no
whatever the
no you want you know
all right
now we got a little bit of time left
and there's still some simple things
that we need to cover that makes all
this work so
if we look in the slides i've actually
broken down all the stuff you need in
the slides as well
like all the big key steps like how do
you create your project
how do you connect to your database
how to use environment variables all
that fun stuff so we're just going to
take a look at this stuff real quick
but it's also all here in the slides
so
if we look
we've done some things here we've
acquired express
we've set express to the variable of app
where we see app it is
express yeah all this stuff is in zell's
reading like you don't need to do this
zell walks through all this in super
detail
here uh we're setting up how we're gonna
talk to our [__] database
right
we set up our port and then this is
something really interesting
here are
i'm setting up my environment variables
right everyone always says leon how do i
not push my database string to
github
how do i
not push the secrets to github well the
way you do that is with uh the
environment variables
so what you're going to see here
right what you're going to see here is i
set up some variables
i set up a database variable a
connection string variable and a
database name
right here this
process.env.db string
this string
is the string that [__] atlas has given
me to connect to my database if you were
on [__] atlas once you set everything
up
you can go to your your actual
application and there's this connect
it'll be this connect your application
and it'll give you the string that you
need
it'll give you the the the string you
need to put for your database connection
and you'll see that there is the
username and the password you're gonna
have to plug in like i said zell covers
this in detail
right i know mine will wolf
going to go over this in detail i'm sure
so you don't want to miss their next
stream i know they're going to go over
this right and so
make sure you've done this all reading
and make sure you check out my wolf's
next stream i'll make sure that i post
when they go live cause i'm pretty sure
the wolfpack's gonna go over this
right
you plug in your password now you're
like leon i had so many people call like
they they sent me a message on um
they sent me a a message on
modmail saying leon
well you grab that string
and you put it in your dot env file i
have this new file called dot env you
put it in your env file but leon you put
your username and your password doesn't
that mean anyone right doesn't mean that
anyone can now access your database
and yeah technically but what did i do
on my end
that helped me a little bit what did i
do that helped me on my end because i
pushed this up to github
i pushed this up to github
yeah i only have my ip address
registered for this application
so only if you had my ip address could
you use my application so even though
i shared my envelopes i wanted you to
see what an emv file looks like it's
simply dot env we just do
dot env you create the file and i put my
database string in there and the cool
thing is
i can now do
process dot env and db string it's just
a variable coming from this file
so this is the thing i got from
mongodb
right this is the the the string i got
from mongodb
i gave it a variable db string and i'm
able to plug that into my server
and what i could do
is in my get ignore i could just do this
dot env
now
my env file will not be pushed to github
right anything that i put in this env
file it could be any of my secrets it
could be any of my database my hero
anything that i don't want to go up to
github
i can put in this env file
and then anywhere in my server.js i can
just do process.env
and whatever variable i give it
right
now i pushed it on mine so you could see
everything
you will not do that in the future in
the future you will put your env inside
your git ignore so none of this stuff
gets pushed up to github
now the cool thing is
if you wanted to use heroku with this
in your heroku like in your heroku like
application
you can plop in the same variables
the same variables that are here in your
env file you can you can put those on
heroku as well uh the cool thing is i
even gave you like a way to do it from
the command line you can do it from
their gui or the command line
here's the command heroku config set db
string equals and so now heroku has that
db string and i have it locally but i
didn't push it up to github
yeah
so that's how we can do it that's how we
can have secrets that's how we can have
private stuff that runs locally but
doesn't get pushed up to github and then
we can also take those same secrets and
put them on heroku so when our code is
running on heroku they have access to
the same variables
so you'd have to do two steps you would
do it locally hide it in your env file
and then also update it on heroku's end
cool
so that's the quick overview of emv
files and we'll see this a lot when we
come back from break
uh here's everything i need to connect
to my database do i have any idea what
anything's happening here could i could
i code this from scratch
no i'm just copying and pasting it
right i'm pretty sure i've done this
enough that i could but real it doesn't
matter you're just copying and pasting
it or better yet you're cloning down
this code and starting with my code
right you're just going to start with
this this is a full api this is full
database connection the only thing you
have to do
when you clone down this code what's the
only thing you have to change
what's the only thing you have to change
you just have to go into your env file
and change this string that's it you
change that string you're done and zell
walks you through it mine will slash
stream watch how to do it so all you do
is change that string i'm going to
remove my env file before i accidentally
forget to push it but i'm going to put
my vs code in here
there you go so that doesn't get pushed
up to github people are freaking out why
was there their fonts changing cool
so we have our environment variables
we're connecting to our database
we're letting
express know that we're using ejs as our
templating language we're setting up
that delicious public folder so any of
our static files that get put in this
public folder they just work we don't
have to write a custom route for it one
of my favorite lines of code of all time
and then this stuff right here
replaces something called body parser uh
this these two lines of code enable us
to like peek into that request object
and get all the stuff we need out of
that request object
yeah
do you need to install the env package
yes you do
i think there's a mistake in the slides
with that yeah we're going to need to
add that here so you should also add
here
npm
install
dot
env
save like you're gonna you're gonna need
that package if you wanna use the
environment variables like i did
yeah body parts has been deprecated uh
these two lines are now built into
express and all they're letting us do
is like pull stuff out of the requests
right that's how we were able to get the
request body and all that fun stuff
all right then we have our api that
we've walked through plenty enough
and the last thing is just listening
we're telling our
app to listen on
process.env port or our port now the
cool thing is
we now know where the heck would it get
process.env.port
where would that come from now
where where would that come from
where did that come from
yeah it would come either from our env
file locally
or
heroku we would it on heroku set a port
or heroku themselves set a port right
so this environment variable is using
the environment variables that come from
heroku
env is short for environment or
environment variables it's like the
variables we need running in that
environment so we have a bunch of we
have one variable that we need for this
environment which is the connection to
our database but eventually this is
going to this is going to be full of
stuff
all of our secret keys our aws keys our
azure keys all the stuff that we're
going to use we'll go in here so that we
have a local copy but that doesn't go to
github
and remember if you want this to work
you have to put dot env inside of your
git ignore you have to put dot e and v
inside of your git ignore i'm not doing
it so you can see what my env file looks
like but if you want the protection of
not pushing your stuff to github or
anywhere else you need to put it in this
folder in the in the git ignore
cool
now
when you go to this repo on
on github you're going to clone it down
what are you going to do after you clone
it down
npm install
gonna npm install
you're gonna change your uh mongodb
string to your own and you're off to the
races you can build the apps of your
dreams folks the apps of your dreams
it's all here you did it you made it
let's go
now i know you're probably gonna have to
run this one back you have to run back
last class that's okay
but i need you to be at the point where
this is at least making some sense
you're understanding the big picture if
you're starting to understand the big
picture of how this stuff is working you
are in the right spot now
we will be taking a two week
break
up to you how you want to spend this
some folks will use the break
to
catch up
some folks will use the brake to relax
some folks might use the brake to build
amazing apps with the stuff we covered
today
it's up to you how you use this time
like i said we'll have some project
nights we'll make sure that we highlight
the stream team members that are still
going live but i hope you take this time
for yourself to do the things that you
need to do whether that's relaxing
catching up building take these two
weeks and i will see you after the break
come ready
come ready after this break to put in
the work to get these jobs to give it
the last big old 100 devs push you
deserve it
u o
u
take the break and i'll see you in two
weeks let's wrap up with a raid so we
get our sweet sweet channel points
uh it is hiccup interactive's uh
two week two year stream anniversary
we've always rated them in the past
let's just go by and say what's up uh
they build uh games
here live on twitch uh so let's go ahead
and say what's up to them just to
celebrate all right folks
setting up the raid
hope you all have a wonderful rest of
your night a wonderful week weekend
enjoy your two weeks make the most of it
in any way that you want
and then i will see you back here in two
weeks i can't wait to see you i hope you
have a wonderful break
peace everyone
let's raid
you